SCITT                                           D. Brooks
Internet-Draft                                  Business Cyber Guardian
Intended status: Standards Track                             May 6 2026
Expires: November 7 2026
                                                         
                 The 'ztdnaid' URI Scheme for Zero-Trust
                     Digital DNA Identifiers (ZTDNAID)
                 draft-brooks-ztdnaid-new-02

Abstract

   This document defines the 'ztdnaid' Uniform Resource Identifier(URI)
   scheme, used to represent globally unique, cryptographically
   verifiable Digital DNA Identifiers (ZTDNAIDs) within Zero Trust
   architecture implementations. A ZTDNAID binds an entitys immutable, 
   unique Digital DNA Record "DDR" to a resolvable identifier 
   suitable for authentication, authorization, attestation, and 
   trust-registry lookup. The scheme is designed for use with trust 
   registries operating across "Public Trust Infrastructure" (PTI), 
   such as SAG-CTR and supports deterministic resolution, offline 
   verification, and secure dereferencing.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is
   at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Scheme Definition
     3.1.  Overview
     3.2.  Syntax
     3.3.  Semantics
   4.  Resolution
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  Internationalization Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   8.  Examples
   9.  Acknowledgments
   10. References
     10.1. Normative References
     10.2. Informative References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Zero Trust architectures increasingly rely on cryptographically
   strong, non-repudiable identifiers that bind an entity to a 
   verifiable digital record. Zero Trust Digital DNA Identifiers 
   (ZTDNAIDs) provide a compact,  light-weight canonical identifier 
   for digital objects, i.e. entity DDR data whose trust posture 
   is continuously evaluated.

   The 'ztdnaid' URI scheme enables interoperable representation,
   transport, and dereferencing and verification of these 
   identifiers across protocols, PTI trust registries, and 
   attestation systems. The scheme is designed to be:

   *  Opaque (no hierarchical semantics)
   *  Deterministic (canonical encoding)
   *  Cryptographically bound (hash-based)
   *  Resolvable (via trust registries such as SAG-CTR)
   *  Suitable for Zero Trust enforcement

   This document registers the 'ztdnaid' URI scheme with IANA under the
   procedures of RFC 7595.

1.1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here. described in [RFC2119].

2. Terminology

   The terms defined in this section have special meaning in the context
   of online trust registration and verification of digital objects

   Digital DNA Identifier : A SHA256, or greater, Hash value 
   representing the cryptographic digest of DDR Record content 
   resulting in a unique digital identifier that is expressed 
   during digital communication exchanges, using an IANA 
   registered URI scheme, such as ztdnaid.

   Digital DNA Record (DDR) : A digital object, i.e. text file 
   containing a unique canonical string identifier representing a 
   real-world physical or virtual object, that is input to a SHA 256, or 
   greater, Hash algorithm that produces a unique Digital DNA 
   Identifier i.e. a ztdnaid.
   
   Digital Object : A Digital Object is a physical, digital 
   representation of a real world physical or virtual object 
   that uses a computer supported  character encoding scheme, 
   i.e. UTF-8 that uniquely describes and identifies the real-
   world object.
      
   Public Trust Infrastructure (PTI) : A public, open, cryptographically 
   verifiable trust layer that enables actors to assert and prove trust,
   integrity, behavior, and compliance of digital objects through 
   registry anchored evidence. PTI generalizes trust guarantees to 
   encompass provenance, transparency, and multiparty accountability 
   for digital objects across digital ecosystems.
   
   SAG-CTR:  Software Assurance Guardian Community Trust Registry used to
   register trust declarations and store evidence data and other 
   information, needed to verify trust in a digital object. Provides 
   verification of digital objects based on Digital DNA Identifiers 
   expressed in a ztdnaid within a PTI Trust Control Plane [PTITCP].
   
  
   

3.  Scheme Definition

3.1.  Overview

   A ZTDNAID is a cryptographic identifier derived from a globally 
   unique    Digital DNA    Record "DDR". The identifier is encoded 
   using URL-safe UTF-8 characters. The scheme is 
   opaque and does not define hierarchical components.

   Example:
      A DDR example unique identifier string using "/" delimiter: 
      Microsoft Corporation/Bill Gates/EmployeeID: 002 
      Equivalent ztdnaid UTF-8 result:
      62588568DE0D42ABF9BBFF9B0FD8D2FEB9A24C950AC66AFCD8679FA4C831392A

3.2.  Syntax

   The syntax of the 'ztdnaid' URI scheme is defined using ABNF
   (RFC 5234):

      ztdnaid-uri   = "ztdnaid:" ztdnaid-value
      ztdnaid-value = 1*utf8url-char
      utf8url-char = ALPHA / DIGIT 

   The value MUST be a URL-safe, UPPERCASE UTF-8 encoding of a cryptographic
   digest (e.g., SHA-256, SHA-384, or SHA-512)[RFC6234]. 

3.3.  Semantics

   A 'ztdnaid' identifies a Digital DNA Record (DDR) that describes an
   entitys unique immutable attributes, provenance, and other 
   identifying characteristics. 
   
   The DDR may be stored in:

   *  A Zero Trust trust registry (e.g., SAG-CTR)
   *  A verifiable credential
   *  A distributed ledger
   *  A local cache

   Dereferencing a ZTDNAID yields metadata, attestations, and trust-
   policy-relevant information.

4.  Resolution

   Resolution of a ZTDNAID is performed by querying a trust registry 
   that supports the ZTDNAID resolution API. The resolution process:

   1. Accepts a ZTDNAID
   2. Locates the corresponding DDR
   3. Returns metadata, endorsements, and attestation material
   4. Verifies the cryptographic binding between the DDR and the 
      ZTDNAID value

   This document does not mandate a specific resolution protocol;
   however, implementations SHOULD support the SCITT-aligned trust
   registry API defined by the Software Assurance Guardian - Community 
   Trust Registry (SAG-CTR).

5.  Security Considerations

   *  Cryptographic Binding: ZTDNAIDs MUST be represent a 
      cryptographic UTF-8 UPPERCASE SHA-256 hash of the DDR data to prevent 
      substitution attacks.
   *  Privacy: ZTDNAIDs are opaque and SHOULD NOT embed personally
      identifiable information.
   *  Replay Protection: Resolvers SHOULD verify freshness of 
      attestation material.
   *  Transport Security: Resolution MAY occur over authenticated,
      encrypted channels (e.g., TLS 1.3).
   *  Trust Registry Integrity: Implementations MUST validate registry
      signatures and trust anchors.

6.  Internationalization Considerations

   The ZTDNAID value is restricted to UPPERCASE UTF-8 URL-safe 
   characters. No internationalization issues are anticipated.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers the 'ztdnaid' URI scheme under the procedures
   of RFC 7595.

   URI Scheme Registration

   *  Scheme name: ztdnaid
   *  Status: Provisional (to be updated to Permanent upon RFC 
              publication)
   *  Applications/protocols that use this scheme name: Zero Trust
      architectures, trust registries, attestation systems, 
      SCITT Trust Registry Transparency Services
   *  Contact: Richard Brooks <dick@businesscyberguardian>
   *  Change controller: Business Cyber Guardian
   *  References: This document

   Scheme Syntax: Section 3.2  
   Scheme Semantics: Section 3.3  
   Security Considerations: Section 5

8.  Examples

62588568DE0D42ABF9BBFF9B0FD8D2FEB9A24C950AC66AFCD8679FA4C831392A

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [PTITCP]   Brooks, R. "A Trust Control Plane for the Digital Age"
              Energy Central Article, March 16, 2026
			  https://www.energycentral.com/
			  
   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC8174>.
			  
   [RFC6234]  Eastlake, D. 3rd, "US Secure Hash Algorithms",
              May 2011, https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6234   

Author's Address

   Dick Brooks
   Business Cyber Guardian
   23 Linda Dr.
   Westfield, Massachusetts 01085
   United States of America
   Email: dick@businesscyberguardian.com
